document initial spatial use case, data flow, and design/development … (#608)
NOAA-OWP/ngen: doc/spatial_coupling_usecase_and_design.md

# Initial spatial coupling design

> ## Terms
> 
> The following are some terms used to disscuss the spatial intefrace and layer semantics.  These are just loose, conceptual terms at the moment, and are subject to refinement, removal, ect.  They are, for now, simply useful to think about and design with.
> 
> **Catchment**: Computational response unit of the framework, with 2D geometry (polygon) and unique identity provided by HY Features Hydrofabric.  
> 
> **Spatial Source**: A geo-spatial data set (e.g. grid) that must provide inputs to a **Catchment**.
> 
> **Spatial Catchment**: Spatially discritized **Catchment** with a clear definition of the discritization/grid type (See [BMI grid types](https://bmi.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html#get-grid-type))
> 
> ## Use Case Diagram
> A basic use case required to be supported by the spatial coupling semantics is diagrammed below.  A more complete description of this diagram will be added to this document.
> 
> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
> 
>         L1["`[ N ] Layer Number
>              ( N ) Priority
>             `"]
> 
>     subgraph A["`[1] Gridded Forcing Engine BMI
>                 _one per PE_`"]
>         A3["`Bounding Box`"]
>         direction LR
>         A1["`Var_1
>         Var_2`"]
>         A2["`Collect vars after layer update **(1)**`"]
>         A1 --> A2
>     end
>     subgraph B["`[2] Gridded NOAA-OWP Regional **(2)**
>                 _one per PE_`"]
>         B1["`Bounding Box`"]
>         B2["`Collect vars after layer update **(1)**`"]
>     end
>     A3 --> B1
>     A2 --> |"`Grid Index Transform **(2)**`"| B
> 
>     C["`[3] Catchment Formulations **(3)**`"]
> 
>     B2 --> |"`Mean Aggregation Transform **(1)**
>             Regridding Transform (future work for gridded formulations)`"| C
> 
>      D["`[3] Routing`"]
> 
>     C --> |"`Point Identity/Index Map?
>             Write output to disk, sync read`"| D
> 
> ```
> ## Initial Simplifying Assumpitons
> - Start with a uniform rectilinear input grid
> - Ensure NOAH-OWP Regional layer aligns with this grid (no regridding required)
> - Preprocess catchment -> grid intersections/weight maps
>     - Use these for quick mean aggregation of variables to lumped catchment
> 
> ## Features required
> - Need a spatially aware catchment/formulation mechanic which can 
>     - Store spatial meta data
>         - Grid Type, Weight Maps, Ect
>     - Virtually dispatch data to BMI models using `Set_Value()`, with required spatail transforms (aggregation, regridding, ect) handled in the dispatch
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Initial spatial coupling design

## Terms

The following are some terms used to discuss the spatial interface and layer semantics.  These are just loose, conceptual terms at the moment, and are subject to refinement, removal, etc.  They are, for now, simply useful to think about and design with.

**Catchment**: Computational response unit of the framework, with 2D geometry (polygon) and unique identity provided by HY Features Hydrofabric.  

**Spatial Source**: A geo-spatial data set (e.g. grid) that must provide inputs to a **Catchment**.

**Spatial Catchment**: Spatially discretized **Catchment** with a clear definition of the discretization/grid type (See [BMI grid types](https://bmi.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html#get-grid-type))

## Use Case Diagram
A basic use case required to be supported by the spatial coupling semantics is diagrammed below.  A more complete description of this diagram will be added to this document.

```mermaid
flowchart TD

        L1["`[ N ] Layer Number
             ( N ) Priority
            `"]

    subgraph A["`[1] Gridded Forcing Engine BMI
                _one per PE_`"]
        A3["`Bounding Box`"]
        direction LR
        A1["`Var_1
        Var_2`"]
        A2["`Collect vars after layer update **(1)**`"]
        A1 --> A2
    end
    subgraph B["`[2] Gridded NOAA-OWP Regional **(2)**
                _one per PE_`"]
        B1["`Bounding Box`"]
        B2["`Collect vars after layer update **(1)**`"]
    end
    A3 --> B1
    A2 --> |"`Grid Index Transform **(2)**`"| B

    C["`[3] Catchment Formulations **(3)**`"]

    B2 --> |"`Mean Aggregation Transform **(1)**
            Regridding Transform (future work for gridded formulations)`"| C

     D["`[3] Routing`"]

    C --> |"`Point Identity/Index Map?
            Write output to disk, sync read`"| D

```
## Initial Simplifying Assumptions
- Start with a uniform rectilinear input grid
- Ensure NOAH-OWP Regional layer aligns with this grid (no regridding required)
- Preprocess catchment -> grid intersections/weight maps
    - Use these for quick mean aggregation of variables to lumped catchment

## Features required
- Need a spatially aware catchment/formulation mechanic which can 
    - Store spatial meta data
        - Grid Type, Weight Maps, etc
    - Virtually dispatch data to BMI models using `Set_Value()`, with required spatial transforms (aggregation, regridding, ect) handled in the dispatch

```

Reviewer: (spelling fixes)
